readme.md, before:

# berlin-gtfs-rt-server

**Poll the [VBB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verkehrsverbund_Berlin-Brandenburg) [HAFAS endpoint](https://github.com/public-transport/vbb-hafas) to provide a [GTFS Realtime (GTFS-RT)](https://gtfs.org/reference/realtime/v2/) feed for Berlin & Brandenburg.**

![ISC-licensed](https://img.shields.io/github/license/derhuerst/berlin-gtfs-rt-server.svg)
[![support me via GitHub Sponsors](https://img.shields.io/badge/support%20me-donate-fa7664.svg)](https://github.com/sponsors/derhuerst)
[![chat with me on Twitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat%20with%20me-on%20Twitter-1da1f2.svg)](https://twitter.com/derhuerst)

This project

1. uses [`hafas-client`](https://github.com/public-transport/hafas-client) & [`hafas-monitor-trips`](https://github.com/derhuerst/hafas-monitor-trips) to fetch live data about all vehicles in the Berlin & Brandenburg bounding box,
2. uses [`hafas-gtfs-rt-feed`](https://github.com/derhuerst/hafas-gtfs-rt-feed) & [`gtfs-rt-differential-to-full-dataset`](https://github.com/derhuerst/gtfs-rt-differential-to-full-dataset) to build a live [GTFS Realtime (GTFS-RT)](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs-realtime/) feed from the data,
3. uses [`serve-buffer`](https://github.com/derhuerst/serve-buffer) to serve the feed efficiently.


## Installing & running

### Prerequisites

`berlin-gtfs-rt-server` needs access to a [Redis](https://redis.io/) server, you can configure a custom host/port by setting the `REDIS_URL` environment variable. It also needs a [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org) 12+ server to work, you can configure access using the [`PG*` environment variables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/libpq-envars.html).

```shell
git clone https://github.com/derhuerst/berlin-gtfs-rt-server.git
cd berlin-gtfs-rt-server
npm install --production
```

### Building the matching index

```shell
npm run build
```

The build script will download [the latest VBB GTFS Static data](https://vbb-gtfs.jannisr.de/latest/) and import it into PostgreSQL. Then, it will add [additional lookup tables to match realtime data with GTFS Static data](https://github.com/derhuerst/match-gtfs-rt-to-gtfs). [`psql`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html) will need to have access to your database.

### Running

Specify the bounding box to be observed as JSON:

```shell
export BBOX='{"north": 52.52, "west": 13.36, "south": 52.5, "east": 13.39}'
```

`berlin-gtfs-rt-server` is split into three parts: polling the HAFAS endpoint, matching realtime data & serving a GTFS-RT feed. These parts are implemented as separate processes:

```shell
node monitor.js | node match.js | node serve.js
```

*Note:* I recommend to run them with [`set -o pipefail`](https://vaneyckt.io/posts/safer_bash_scripts_with_set_euxo_pipefail/). Also, use a tool like [`systemctl`](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-systemctl-to-manage-systemd-services-and-units) or [`forever`](https://github.com/foreversd/forever#readme) that restarts them when they crash.

Commit message:

re-license as Prosperity/Apache 💥
[ci skip]

readme.md, after:

# berlin-gtfs-rt-server

**Poll the [VBB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verkehrsverbund_Berlin-Brandenburg) [HAFAS endpoint](https://github.com/public-transport/vbb-hafas) to provide a [GTFS Realtime (GTFS-RT)](https://gtfs.org/reference/realtime/v2/) feed for Berlin & Brandenburg.**

[![Prosperity/Apache license](https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=license&message=Prosperity%2FApache&color=0997E8)](#license)
[![support me via GitHub Sponsors](https://img.shields.io/badge/support%20me-donate-fa7664.svg)](https://github.com/sponsors/derhuerst)
[![chat with me on Twitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat%20with%20me-on%20Twitter-1da1f2.svg)](https://twitter.com/derhuerst)

This project

1. uses [`hafas-client`](https://github.com/public-transport/hafas-client) & [`hafas-monitor-trips`](https://github.com/derhuerst/hafas-monitor-trips) to fetch live data about all vehicles in the Berlin & Brandenburg bounding box,
2. uses [`hafas-gtfs-rt-feed`](https://github.com/derhuerst/hafas-gtfs-rt-feed) & [`gtfs-rt-differential-to-full-dataset`](https://github.com/derhuerst/gtfs-rt-differential-to-full-dataset) to build a live [GTFS Realtime (GTFS-RT)](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs-realtime/) feed from the data,
3. uses [`serve-buffer`](https://github.com/derhuerst/serve-buffer) to serve the feed efficiently.


## Installing & running

### Prerequisites

`berlin-gtfs-rt-server` needs access to a [Redis](https://redis.io/) server, you can configure a custom host/port by setting the `REDIS_URL` environment variable. It also needs a [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org) 12+ server to work, you can configure access using the [`PG*` environment variables](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/12/libpq-envars.html).

```shell
git clone https://github.com/derhuerst/berlin-gtfs-rt-server.git
cd berlin-gtfs-rt-server
npm install --production
```

### Building the matching index

```shell
npm run build
```

The build script will download [the latest VBB GTFS Static data](https://vbb-gtfs.jannisr.de/latest/) and import it into PostgreSQL. Then, it will add [additional lookup tables to match realtime data with GTFS Static data](https://github.com/derhuerst/match-gtfs-rt-to-gtfs). [`psql`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/app-psql.html) will need to have access to your database.

### Running

Specify the bounding box to be observed as JSON:

```shell
export BBOX='{"north": 52.52, "west": 13.36, "south": 52.5, "east": 13.39}'
```

`berlin-gtfs-rt-server` is split into three parts: polling the HAFAS endpoint, matching realtime data & serving a GTFS-RT feed. These parts are implemented as separate processes:

```shell
node monitor.js | node match.js | node serve.js
```

*Note:* I recommend to run them with [`set -o pipefail`](https://vaneyckt.io/posts/safer_bash_scripts_with_set_euxo_pipefail/). Also, use a tool like [`systemctl`](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-systemctl-to-manage-systemd-services-and-units) or [`forever`](https://github.com/foreversd/forever#readme) that restarts them when they crash.


## License

This project is dual-licensed: **My contributions are licensed under the [*Prosperity Public License*](https://prosperitylicense.com), [contributions of other people](https://github.com/derhuerst/hafas-gtfs-rt-feed/graphs/contributors) are licensed as [Apache 2.0](https://apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)**.

> This license allows you to use and share this software for noncommercial purposes for free and to try this software for commercial purposes for thirty days.

> Personal use for research, experiment, and testing for the benefit of public knowledge, personal study, private entertainment, hobby projects, amateur pursuits, or religious observance, without any anticipated commercial application, doesn’t count as use for a commercial purpose.

~~[Buy a commercial license](https://licensezero.com/offers/todo) or~~ read more about [why I sell private licenses for my projects](https://gist.github.com/derhuerst/0ef31ee82b6300d2cafd03d10dd522f7).
